A movie set is a strong example
of the importance of team roles.
On a film set, you can imagine
how different people play different parts.
For example, you need a director to provide creative vision,
a cinematographer to shoot the film,
and a producer to manage the logistics
and generally make things happen.
Every role is essential to the success of the film.
If everyone wanted to be a director,
the film would never be shot or edited.
If no one wanted to take charge of audio,
the film wouldn't be felt or experienced in the same way.
While these are formal roles on a set,
the need to clarify roles and create balance between them
still applies to informal roles, too.
Informal roles describe the team responsibilities
and contributions we tend to take on
as a result of our pattern of behavior
and our interpersonal strengths.
Whether you realize it or not,
your team members are naturally gravitating
toward specific roles.
According to Belbin's Team Roles,
which is one of the most accessible and widely used models,
there are nine common roles on a team.
The first three roles are the shaper,
implementer and completer-finisher.
These make up the action-oriented team roles
because they're all about getting things done
and taking action.
First up is the shaper.
A shaper challenges and drives the team
to achieve its goals.
Shapers are typically high-energy, highly motivated
and headstrong individuals.
They're enthusiastic and dynamic leaders
who perform great under pressure
and inspire others to act.
Implementers, then, are the people who get things done.
They turn the team's ideas into practical steps
and action plans, and then complete them.
Implementers are typically well-organized,
consistent and reliable.
They have an outstanding work ethic
that the team can count on, and they rarely miss a deadline.
The last action-oriented role
is the completer, the finisher.
Completer-finishers serve to review the team's work
at the end of a project and polish it,
check it for details or correct mistakes.
It's not a surprise, then, to find that completer-finishers
are often accurate, detail-oriented
and thorough perfectionists.
The next three roles are people-oriented.
That means they revolve around taking care
of the company's most important asset, its people.
This includes coordinators, team workers
and resource investigators.
Coordinators manage the team's talent
and work to promote collaboration and consensus.
They're who you think of when you imagine team managers
in a traditional sense.
They're mature and collected individuals
who naturally excel at bringing a team together
to work towards shared goals
and coordinating that team's activities.
Team workers are next.
These are all-purpose members
who support others on the team wherever they need it.
Team workers are helpful, diplomatic and versatile.
They care about collective goals
and making sure that everyone feels supported.
People often like and respect team workers,
so they can also serve as the glue
that holds a team together,
or the mediator that diffuses conflict.
Third, resource investigators are ideal
for developing strategic relationships
and securing resources on behalf of the team.
Resource investigators are typically outgoing,
charming, affable, persuasive and enthusiastic.
That's why they make a great face for the company.
The team relies on its resource investigator
to generate enthusiasm, negotiate resources
and develop new contacts or partnerships.
The final three roles fall
under the thought-oriented category.
That means they deal with ideas and information,
plants, monitor-evaluators and specialists
are all considered thought-oriented roles.
First, let's talk about plants.
Plants help the team by brainstorming new ideas
or ways of doing things.
Creative, free-thinking and inventive,
plants are most likely to propel innovation,
spearhead original concepts or find new ways
to approach complex problems.
They think outside the box.
Next, monitor-evaluators are best at analyzing
and evaluating the ideas and suggestions of others,
such as plants.
They excel at weighing the strengths and weaknesses
of the team's options.
Teams rely on monitor-evaluators to make objective decisions
and to determine the feasibility of an idea
and develop it further.
The very last team role is the specialist.
Specialists offer specialized knowledge, skills
and technical expertise that are essential
to the success of the team.
They are incredibly knowledgeable, professional
and often eager to share their expertise with others.
As you reflect on your team's informal roles,
try asking yourself what roles do my team members play?
And how well am I using each team member's strengths?
Are there any roles missing?
Or is there an overlap between roles
that's creating tension?
From there, you can then decide how best
to balance your team and clarify team roles.